we're gonna be talking about a problem
in graph theory that was unsolved for
more than 50 years and very recently
someone solved it so people are very
excited about this it is called head
Aetna Amy's conjecture just a bit of a
mouthful named after the mathematician
who first came up with it in 1966 I
believe it was part of his doctoral
dissertation he conjectured this result
about graph theory and for like more
than 50 years people tried to prove it
they tried to disprove it and no one
seemed to be able to make any headway
but now we know it is not true so so I
said this is graph theory so maybe the
first thing I should say is that when I
say graph I don't mean a graph like the
kind you make at school where there's
the x axis and the y axis and you're
graphing a function or something it's
very confusing mathematicians actually
use the word graph for two different
things so the kind of graph that we're
gonna be talking about is what in most
other areas of science is called a
network so it's just a collection of
nodes or vertices that are connected by
edges some of some things are connected
some things might not be connected so
this problem that we're going to be
talking about is in an area of graph
theory called graph coloring and the
idea is that we want to color the nodes
of our network in such a way that
whenever two nodes share an edge they're
different colors so for example I'll
just draw a really simple graph and then
if I wanted to color this well you know
maybe I'd start by coloring this one red
you see this one it's connected to that
so I can't color that one red so let's
make that one green so this one down
here it's connected to the red one and
the green one so I can't reuse either of
those colors so let's color that one
yellow and now this last one it's
connected to the green vertex so I
definitely don't want to use green but I
could use red or yellow and I've used
three colors which is the smallest
number of colors we could use for this
graph and one of the big questions that
mathematicians ask about graphs is
what's the smallest number of colors I
can used and this is a question that has
a really long history
years ago or so people were already
thinking about this in terms of coloring
maps and how many colors do you need if
you want to color a map so that no two
adjoining countries or states are the
same color and this maybe doesn't seem
like a question about graph theory
because you're like well there's no
vertices or edges but it's very easy to
convert this into a graph theory
question by just because declaring that
you know each each of these states is a
node and if two states border each other
then let's connect them so then this
question of coloring the map so that
adjoining states are different colors is
exactly the same as the graph coloring
question so a long time ago people
conjectured that that for maps the
greatest number of colors you'll ever
need is four and it took forever to
prove this it was proved in the 1970s
with this proof that used massive
computations and I think people still
don't totally understand what's going on
there but we do know that for these the
graphs that come from these kinds of
maps for colors is enough I was gonna
give you a couple more examples of where
graph coloring can come up just one kind
of fun example if you look at a pseudo
ku puzzle in case you don't know how
these work you're trying to fill in all
these boxes with digits from one to nine
so that every row has all the digits
exactly once every column has all the
digits exactly once in each of these
little bold boxes has all the digits
exactly once so you might think well how
is this a graph coloring problem but you
can actually translate this exactly into
graph coloring so the idea here is that
we're going to be using nine colors so
we have one color for each of the digits
from 1 to 9 we're going to if we have a
node here we're going to connect it to
all the things that can't be the same
digit is that okay so like we have a 4
in this box so that means we're not
allowed to have fours in the rest of
this row or the rest of this column or
the rest of this box so we end up with
loads of vertices connected by loads of
edges and then what you're trying to do
is so maybe if we decided that 4 is
going to be
colored red so all these forests here
are read each so we'll color all the
numbers that are us that are forced on
us and then we're trying to color all
the other vertices you with our nine
colors and if we do it successfully if
we do it in a way we're connected nodes
are different colors then what we've
done is we've ensured that we never use
the same digit twice in in one of those
little boxes or rows or columns so
coloring with nine colors is identical
to solving the pseudo GU could you use
that to solve a Sudoku then if I was
sitting on the train or something could
I be drawing a graph and like with that
you could although I think if you
actually tried to draw this graph
there'd be so many edges in it like
getting in the way of each other that it
would be harder to see but you certainly
if you had like nine colored pencils you
could certainly decide to you know
assign each number a different color and
write colors into the boxes instead of
numbers and maybe people who are really
attuned to colors and visuals might have
an easier time solving pseudo goos that
way and I want to just go through one
more example quickly with you because
this is going to lead right into head at
knee Amy's conjecture we're gonna
imagine that we are hosting maybe a
series of weekend parties at our estate
out in the country because we're very
rich so we're trying to decide who to
invite on which weekend and we want to
collect together good assortment of
people like people who we think are
gonna enjoy each other's company
maybe we know each person's job and we
you know some of the jobs are kind of
conducive to talking with each other you
know like a mathematician and in the
economist we'll find some common topics
and other jobs or not so if we wanted to
plan out our weekend party schedule we
could start by basically assigning a
different color to every weekend and
then make a graph of all those different
jobs like just to do a little toy
example that's going to lead into what
we care about so so maybe
maybe the people that we're inviting
have just four jobs like maybe one of
them is a schoolteacher so let's have an
economist math professor camp counselor
what graph would we draw that would help
us to have good groupings for our party
well so you know the teacher would
probably find things to talk about with
the camp counselor you know like
managing groups of kids and they could
probably also talk with the math
professor but maybe they wouldn't have
such an easy time striking up a
conversation with the economist so what
we're gonna do is we're gonna link
things together if they don't get along
well which which might feel a little
backwards because you think oh you know
people get along well we should blink
them but remember that what we're gonna
do is we're going to use our coloring to
separate those people so we want to link
the ones that don't get along so you
know teacher and economists the
economists and the camp counselor maybe
they're not going to find something and
same thing for the camp counselor and
the math professor but these other
things you know like these two should
get along fine these two these two so
this is our graph and now what we can do
is we can try to color the graph and
that's gonna tell us which weekend to
invite each person so you know let's
start by coloring the economists red and
then we have to make sure that these two
vertices are not red because they're
connected to the red one but they're not
connected to each other so you know if I
make the camp counselor yellow there's
no reason why I couldn't make the
teacher yellow and then the math
professor can't be yellow because the
math professor is connected to the camp
counselor but there's nothing stopping
the math professors from being red so we
can color our graph with just two colors
Erica were you endeavoring to use the
minimum colors because I mean you could
have done the math professor green there
but were you endeavour I could I
I could have colored green and yes I was
endeavouring to use the smallest number
of colors possible because now no one's
coming over on Green weekend that means
that I can just loaf around in my
pajamas the whole weekend and binge
watch Netflix so I'm good so yeah we're
trying to use as few colors as possible
so that's pretty simple so let's see so
on red weekend and
invite the math professor and the
economist and on yellow weekend I'm
going to invite the camp counselor in
the teacher so that's pretty simple but
now what if we wanted to be a little
more sophisticated as as a host because
we actually know other things about our
friends besides their jobs and so let's
imagine that maybe we also know some
stuff about their hobbies that means
that there are more ways that they could
get along with each other
so like maybe the math professor in the
camp counselor they don't they can't
really talk shop with each other but you
know maybe they each play a musical
instrument and so they could talk about
that so let's draw a hobby graph and I
want to keep these graphs really simple
very basic because when we start
combining them things are gonna get a
little complicated so I'm just gonna
draw something with three vertices and
so let's imagine that maybe some of our
friends collect stamps while we're
filming this in Berkeley so you know
maybe we should have some people who
like to do yoga and some other people
who like meditation and if we wanted to
connect up this graph well the people
who do yoga and the people who do
meditation they're probably going to get
along well but they might not find
anything to talk about with a stamp
collector so we're gonna connect things
up like that and now if we try to color
this graph again we can actually get
away with two colors so we color the
stamp collectors red then we're gonna
need to color the other ones not red so
I could color them two different colors
but since we're trying to use as few
colors as possible
we'll color them both yellow so now we
have a graph for jobs and we have a
graph for hobbies and we're going to
imagine that these two things can come
in all sorts of different pairings so
like we couldn't have an economist who
collect stamps and a camp counselor who
does yoga and another camp counselor who
does meditation and and so on all the
different combinations so now we have a
bigger pool of different kinds of
friends and we have two different pieces
of information about how they get along
and the question is how do we combine
them so what we're going to do is we're
going to make a sort of
a bigger graph that in a certain sense
you can think of as multiplying these
two graphs with each other so that
sounds kind of weird you know like how
do you multiply grass but if you think
about all the different pairings that I
just talked about you know like
economists with stamps economists with
yoga economists with meditation well
there's four different jobs and three
different hobbies that the jobs can be
paired with so if we want to capture all
the different pairings
we're gonna need twelve different pairs
so we already feel see that there is
kind of a multiplication feel to this so
I need to draw a graph that has twelve
vertices and there's loads of different
ways you know I could just plonk the 12
vertices down wherever I want but I want
to try to remember some of the structure
of these graphs because that's just
gonna make it easier so I'm gonna have
like three vertices that correspond to
the economists with the different
hobbies and three vertices that
correspond to the teacher with the three
different hobbies and three that
correspond to the camp counselor with
the different hobbies and three for the
math professor so those are my vertices
and you know and and having arranged
them like this we can kind of see who
all these different people are this
person here is an economist who collect
stamps right this person is a teacher
who does meditation right this is a
teacher who collects stamps and so on
and now we need to think about how we're
gonna connect all these vertices up and
so remember we want to invite people who
are going to get along with each other
in at least one way they they don't need
to be able to talk about their jobs and
their hobbies but they need something
that's gonna you know break the ice for
them one one competitive thing one
compatible thing so we want to connect
people by an edge if they don't have one
compatible thing if there's nothing they
could find to talk about then we're
going to draw an edge because that's
going to make sure that once we color
they're going to be on different
weekends
so for example the economists who
collect stamps we're not going to
connect that person to the teacher who
like stamps because they're good they
can talk about stamps but we will
connect the economists to this teacher
who likes meditation because we've
decided already that economists and
teachers don't get along and stamp
collectors and meditation people don't
get along and similarly we're going to
connect that economists to the teacher
who does yoga because there's nothing
compatible there so we draw these two
edges and I'm not going to go through
how we do all the different edges
because it's the same idea for all of
them but we end up drawing a bunch of
edges into this graph so we've we've
built this graph that's sort of that we
got by in a certain sense multiplying
these two graphs together and
mathematicians actually have a name for
this it's called the tensor product so
you know product like multiplying and
they actually use an X symbol to denote
it so like if one of the graphs was
called G and the other one was called H
then the tensor product would be written
G times H for some reason graphs are
always G and H so now we've drawn our
graph and we want to start planning out
our weekends so we want to figure out a
good way to color the graph and one
thing that would be an easy solution is
just to borrow one of the colorings that
I already did okay so like we could just
take the coloring that I did here and
basically use it to color this graph
like just color all the stamp collectors
red like that you color all the yoga and
meditation people yellow and that's
definitely gonna be a valid coloring of
this graph because we already knew that
that was a way to guarantee that people
who are at the same weekend would find
things to talk about
so you know basically I just ignore
their jobs and focused on their hobbies
or I could have done it the other way I
could have said I'm just gonna focus on
their jobs so I'm gonna color all the
Economist's red no matter what their
hobby is and Lucy and all the math
professors I'm gonna color them red too
and color all the teachers yellow and
color all the camp counselors yellow and
that's a different way that I could
decide who to invite for which weekend I
can just focus on their jobs or I can
just focus on their hobbies and get a
coloring either way to different
colorings of this graph but the question
is is that the best we can do so in
these simple toy examples it's obvious
that this is the best we can do but if I
started drawing more complicated graphs
it's not obvious at all you know maybe
the job graph needs eight colors and the
Hobby graph needs 13 colors and then the
tensor product well we know there's one
way to color it using eight and one way
using 13 but maybe there's some way that
uses only four colors so so that's the
question that we want to understand
because you know if we can use fewer
weekends then that would be nice more a
Netflix days yes
in 1966 hidden Amy conjectured that
there is nothing better that you can do
there's no better colouring than the
ones you get from these graphs so the
minimum coloring on one of your original
graphs is the minimum for your mega
graph later on your tensor graph exactly
and this conjecture stuck around for
more than 50 years people could not
figure out how to prove it or how to
disprove it
they did make some progress with trying
to come up with a proof they showed that
any time that you're your job and hobby
graphs are simple enough that they use
four or fewer colors then it is true
that the tensor graph will just need the
same number of colors as whichever one
of those is some
but but they couldn't get beyond that so
it only takes one lucky person to make
one and color it with fewer colors to
bring it all down well exactly and that
is what eventually did happen now if you
think about this conjecture I mean I
personally found this conjecture
surprising because if you think about it
you know so these two colorings that we
made by just focusing on one of the
graphs they're forgetting about a lot of
things you know about your guests so you
know if I use this coloring the one that
comes from the jobs to color my graph
well you know maybe there were some
people who were compatible that I
separated unnecessarily like you know so
a camp counselor who does yoga could
have come the same weekend as a math
professor who does meditation but I
split them up because I was only
focusing on their jobs it almost feels
like your coloring option that you
showed me there for the tensor graph was
like the lazy ocean it yes they are the
lazy options where we're just kind of
throwing away a lot of what we know and
so so it seems very plausible if you
combine everything you know you could
get away with fewer weekends but it
turns out that it's really really hard
to concoct an actual example of graphs
where that is true and so you know
decades went by and no one found a
counter example until recently a
mathematician named Yaroslav sheet off
came up with one I'm so excited I'm
going to say it I am NOT going to draw
it for you and I'll explain why soon so
I'm gonna tell you a bit about how he
liked the nature of the grass that he
came up with and then I'll explain to
you why I'm not gonna draw so what he
did is he started with some graph let's
just call it G and then he constructed
like for the second graph you know if G
is our jobs graph and for the Hobby
graph he constructed what mathematicians
call an exponential graph based on the
original graph we have our graph G maybe
we choose a palette of colors you know
like however many sharpies I have in
different colors
and we think about all the different
ways we could color our graph and and
and I mean like really any kind of
coloring it's okay if connected edges
have the same color just any way of
slapping colors onto vertices and the
exponential graph is a graph in which
every vertex represents a coloring of my
original graph so any possible coloring
is going to be a vertex in this
exponential graph so so there's a lot of
different colorings in fact exponential
is the reason it's called exponential is
if I have four colors then I can color
this vertex four colors and that one
four colors and that one you know four
different colors and so the number of
different combinations of colorings is
going to be like you know four to the
however many vertices I have so that's
why these things are exponential but
then he showed that if you choose your
original graph in just the right way and
choose just the right number of colors
for building your exponential graph then
if you take those two graphs and tensor
them together in this way you're gonna
end up with a tensor product that needs
fewer colors than either of those two
graphs and I don't think that he spent a
lot of time like really trying to
optimize these these numbers like he
just wanted a counter example you know
often when mathematicians are trying to
build a counter example to something
they'll just make all the numbers just
like as big as they need to make all the
calculations really easy so I think he
did that and so the graphs that he ended
up describing our absolutely humongous
it said like the the graph G the like
the first graph havoc for to the 100
vertices and the exponential graph had
four to the ten thousand vertices so I I
typed it into Google's calculator and it
told me that the answer was infinity so
according to Google at least to this
this exponential graph has infinitely
many vertices and so I'm here to tell
you actually that for the ten thousand
is not equal to infinity but it is a
really really big number
it's um it's roughly equal to 1 followed
by 6000 zeroes most estimates of the
number of particles in the observable
universe are like one followed by 80
zeroes then this is 1 followed by 6000
zeroes okay I'm not so ask you to draw
it then you're okay I'm not gonna draw
it and um you know I don't know if
there's anyone out there who has that
many friends just because his examples
his counter examples are that big it
does not mean that you need to go that
big to get to a counter example so at
present mathematicians don't really know
how small the counter examples can be so
it is possible that there are examples
out there that are of a size that is you
know sort of totally reasonable and
could actually correspond to some you
know something that you could actually
care about and could fathom in the you
know in the in the observable universe
but that is something that we don't know
yet but now we know the conjecture is
false and so now mathematicians can
start chipping away at you know like how
small can these counter examples be he
is still alive now you're a journalist
yeah now know you've written about this
did you speak to him I I was in touch
with him by email and he said that he
was delighted he he was not at all
invested in his conjecture having to be
true he was just happy to get an answer
after 50 years whether you're chilling
on the sofa or out walking the dog there
can be few simpler pleasures than losing
yourself in an audio book and when it
comes to audio books it's got to be
today's episode sponsor audible their
selection is huge there are plenty of
math books of course or you can go from
my favorite audio book so far that's
endurance by Alfred Lansing it's a
cracking true story simply told
beautifully narrated you'll really feel
like you're stranded in the Antarctic
ice with this band of incredible
explorers it's an amazing audio book
really give it a listen now if you're
already on board with audible don't
worry you can also gift it to a friend
or family member
let them share the joy and for a limited
time you can get three months of audible
for just six dollars 95
a month that's more than half off the
regular price you go to audible.com
slash numberphile or if you're in the
u.s. you can text a numberphile to 500
500 again audible.com slash numberphile
or texts numberphile to 500 500 that's
in the US get that great discount thanks
to audible for supporting this episode
every time I take a step we can really
really quickly write like the infinite
maker you sure you're gonna do the
voyage to the river so I've got the
music scholar